Esi Edugyan’s Washington Black tells the miraculous story of a young enslaved boy who, defying all expectation and imagination, escapes slavery in a hot air balloon known as the Cloud-cutter. Wash, the enslaved boy, has been loaned to his cruel master’s brother Titch for help with the cloudcutter, and has reached the top of Corvus peak to scout out a launch site. In this passage, there is a complexity that needs an explanation. At the beginning of this passage, Wash describes his experiences exactly how they went. However, when he looks from the peak, he then seems to talk directly to the reader, using phrases such as “Imagine it” (Edugyan 53). This unexpected switch throws the reader off, leaving the reader wondering why the author would make this choice. An explanation could be that Edugyan wants to invoke the reader into the book, placing the reader into the text. Instead of just reading, Edugyan wants the reader to experience Wash’s story. This book is about a world far removed from our own, and Wash’s experiences are not easily relatable. Letting the reader just read the book lets the reader watch the story from afar, but by pulling the reader in, the reader can relate with and truly understand Wash’s experiences.
In order to understand this solution, we must look at the places in the text where Wash directly addresses the reader. Directly addressing the reader shows Edugyan's attempt to fix the problem where Wash’s experience is so different from ours that it is hard for us to understand it. The literary strategy of directly addressing the reader is present at many points in the text, especially where Wash experiences strong emotions. When Wash rises up in the Cloud-cutter, he implicitly asks the reader in wonder, “What did I feel? What would anyone feel, in such a place?” (Edugyan 119). For Wash, however, the experience is not just about flying, it is his escape from slavery, making it a good place to use this strategy, helping the reader realize how significant this is. Another instance of this is when Wash sees Big Kit, he also implicitly asks the reader, this time in surprise, “How could I not have known her?” (Edugyan 90). Wash has just realized that the badly maimed woman who walked in was Big Kit, and is mad at himself for not realizing earlier, and aggrieved at Kit’s state; also a good place to use that strategy. These moments of direct address force the reader to pay more attention and realize how strongly the character feels, which brings us closer to understanding the character’s experience, and their world. In this case, the world of slavery. This idea of direct address is exemplified when Wash reaches the top of Corvus peak and sees a radically different view of his island, and his world:

Oh, how different the world did look at that height. Imagine it: my whole life I had lived on that brutish island and never had I seen its edges, never had I seen the ocean in its vastness, the white breakers rolling in upon the beaches. Never had I seen the roads, with their tiny men and tiny horses, the roof of Wilde Hall winking in the light. This island fell away on all sides, green glittering. There were birds in the grasses of Corvus Peak, and as I walked they would rise in a wave of song, scattering into the sky. The sun was already descending, the shadows lengthening beyond us. I walked to the southern cliff edge and stared at the glittering blue ocean, its pricks of light there like thousands of cane knives. (Edugyan 53-54)

At the beginning of this passage, Wash directly addresses the reader, asking the reader to “Imagine it: my whole life I had lived on that brutish island.” This gets the reader’s attention, and indicates to the reader the fact that this is an important experience to Wash. The second part of the sentence suggests why: Wash has never been outside the plantation, so is seeing the island, and more of his world, for the first time, leaving Wash in wonder at the sight. After walking to the edge of the cliff, Wash stares at the “glittering blue ocean, its pricks of light there like a thousand cane knives.” Cane knives are knives used to cut sugarcane. Wash uses them to compare to the glints in the ocean, as he is enslaved on a sugar plantation where they are ubiquitous. As the reader is not familiar with cane knives, this is wholly the comparison in Wash’s mind. As a result, it brings insight into Wash’s perspective and his world, and helps the reader better see through the eyes of Wash. Writing the passage this way helps fix the problem that Edugyan is trying to fix, as it brings the reader into the passage, helping them experience with and understand Wash, and learn more about Wash’s world. Understanding Wash’s experience and his world leads to better understanding one of this book’s main ideas, which is the cruelty of slavery.
